AIRLINE RESERVATION SYSTEM

The airline reservation system facilitates users (or passengers) in finding suitable
itinerary across several airliners and destinations.
The passengers usually provide the following information to the airline reservation
system for planning their air travel.
● Origin of air travel.
● Destination of air travel.
● Date of the travel: Passenger specifies tentative date of the travel. It is
important to note that if no flight is available on the specific date, the
reservation system provides the flight options within 1 day (before and after) of
the tentative date. For example, if there is no flight on 9

th June from Islamabad

to London, the system will provide the flight options on 8

th and 10th June.

2

FAST National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences

Cyber Security - Data Structures
Spring 2026

● Transits locations: A passenger can optionally specify transit locations along
with the preferred transit duration. For example, a passenger can specify that
s/he wants to have a transit of 19 hours in Dubai while travelling from
Islamabad to London.
It is important to note that a trip to a certain destination might require a transit,
i.e., a connecting flight (even if no transit preference is specified by the
passenger). For example, in the absence of any direct flight from Islamabad to
London, the only possibility might be to have a flight from Islamabad to Dubai
and afterwards a connecting flight from Dubai to London. Clearly, in this case
the passenger has to stay in Dubai for some hours before boarding on the flight
from Dubai to London.
In the absence of transit preferences, the reservation system tries to minimize
the transit time.
● Airline of choice: A passenger can optionally specify the preferred airline for the
travel.
● Cost or travel time: A passenger specifies the criteria to be used by the
reservation system for calculating the possible travel options.

On receiving the passenger query (with the above mentioned options), the
reservation system calculates the possible travels options according to the
criterion selected by the passenger, i.e.,
● Cost: The cost of travel should be minimized. The cost of a connected flight
includes the cost of travelling (i.e., ticket price) on each leg of the journey and
additionally cost of hotel (if transit time is more than 12 hours).
● Travel time: The travel time should be minimized. The travel time also includes
the time of transit.
In addition to the cost and travel time criteria, the travel options calculated by the
reservation system also satisfies the constraints specified by the passenger, i.e.,
preferred airline, transit time preferences etc.

Following table presents some of the use cases that must be handled by airline
reservation system:

3

FAST National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences

Cyber Security - Data Structures
Spring 2026

4

Passenger Query Reservation System
Scenario 1: Passenger wants to book a flight of a certain airline going to a certain
destination on a specific date with minimal travel cost.

Origin
Destination
Date
Airline of choice
Criterion: Travel cost

Sorted list of flights of the specified
airline matching origin, destination as
well as date. The list also includes the
travel options with connected flights.
The list will be sorted on the basis of travel
cost (including all possible charges
explained above).
Additionally, the travel time of each option
is also specified for information purposes.
Scenario 2: Passenger wants to book a fight going to a certain destination on a
specific date with minimal travel time.

Origin
Destination
Date of travel
Criterion: Travel time

List of all possible flights (may be with
connecting flights from different airlines)
sorted according to the travel time
(including the transit time if any).
Additionally, the travel cost of each flight
option is also specified for information
purposes.

Scenario 3: Passenger wants to book a connecting flight going to a certain destination
on a specific date with a transit stay.

Origin
Destination
Date of travel
Transit
location

List of flights matching the constraints
(origin, destination, date of travel, transit
location).
Additionally, the travel cost and travel time
of each flight option is also specified for
information purposes.

FAST National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences

Cyber Security - Data Structures
Spring 2026

Above scenarios are only a few possible passenger booking request scenarios in
an airline reservation system. Students are supposed to handle any combination of
requirements mentioned above.

5
Scenario 4: Passenger wants to book a connecting flight going to a certain destination
on a specific date having a particular transit time with minimum travel time.

Origin

Sorted list of flights matching the
constraints (origin, destination, date
Destination of travel, transit location and transit
Date of travel time). The list will be sorted on the
Transit location
Min and max transit duration

basis of travel time (including the transit
time).

Criterion: Travel time

Additionally, the travel cost of each flight
option is also specified for information
purpose.

Scenario 5: Customer wants to book a non-connecting (i.e., direct) flight going to a
certain destination on a specific date and time.

List of direct flights matching the
constraints (origin, destination,

Origin
Destination

date of travel).

Date of travel Additionally, the travel cost and travel time
of each flight option is also specified for
information purpose.

FAST National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences

Cyber Security - Data Structures
Spring 2026

Instructions
The Flights.txt file contains information about the flights. In particular, each entry in
the file contains the following information (in the same order, separated by space)
● Origin
● Destination
● Date of travel
● Flying time
● Landing time
● Ticket price
● Name of airline

It is important to note that the flying and landing times are added in the flight data
however the passengers are not given the option to choose the preferred time of
flight (rather passengers can only choose the preferred date of travel). The flying
and landing times are included in the flight data for the correct identification of
connecting flights and transit times.
For example, if a PIA flight from Islamabad to Karachi is from 9:00 AM to 11:00
AM. A passenger cannot take a connecting flight from Karachi with flying time
earlier than 11:00 AM. Likewise, a passenger has a transit time of 6 hours in
Karachi, if the connecting flight from Karachi is scheduled to fly at 5:00 PM.
Moreover, the HotelCharges_perday.txt file contains information about the hotel
price if the stay is more than 12 hours (or passengers prefer to have a longer
transit stay).
Generate a main graph by reading the data provided in Flights.txt and
HotelCharges_perday.txt files. For example, the vertices in the graph will be cities
and edges represent availability of flights between the cities.
Moreover, edges store information about the flights between the two adjacent
vertices, e.g., name of airline, ticket price, date of travel, flying time, landing time
etc. The hotel price information can also be stored in the vertices of the respective
cities.

6

FAST National University of Computer & Emerging Sciences

Cyber Security - Data Structures
Spring 2026

Given a passenger query, you might generate a sub-graph (that only contains the
information relevant to the query) OR/AND adjacency matrix/adjacency list to
calculate the results of the query. For example, if the passenger has selected
Emirates as preferred airline then the cities without Emirates flights are not
required to calculate the results of the query.
From the algorithmic perspective, the above mentioned queries (in the table) can
be divided into easy and difficult categories.
The easy category includes queries (i) related to direct flights or (ii) where a
passenger has specified preferred airline (e.g., Emirates or Qatar etc.). The queries
in this category can be answered using the slight modifications to the algorithms
discussed during the lectures.
The difficult category includes queries (i) where flights from multiple airlines can be
used to generate a travel journey or (ii) where passenger has specified preferred
transit location and duration. The queries in this category cannot be answered by
the direct use of algorithms from the lectures. We expect students to think about
the possible data structures and algorithms to solve the queries in this category.
Clearly, the queries in this part have more weightage in the overall project grade.

What to submit
Submit your code according to the guidelines given above. Moreover, you are
supposed to submit a detailed report summarizing the data structures and
algorithms. In particular, you have to justify the algorithm for answering the queries
in difficult categories. Your justification should be scientific (i.e. why you chose a
specific algorithm) by focusing on the time and space complexities as well as
correctness of the algorithm.